.TH SENTINEL 1 "2025-01-09" "C-Sentinel 0.6.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
sentinel \- semantic observability for UNIX systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sentinel
.RB [ \-hqvjwnab ]
.RB [ \-i
.IR seconds ]
.RI [ config_files... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sentinel
probes system state and configuration, identifying anomalies such as
zombie processes, unusual network listeners, permission issues, and
configuration drift.
Output may be human-readable or JSON.
.PP
If no
.I config_files
are specified, sentinel probes common system configuration files.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quick
Show quick analysis summary only.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Include all processes, not just notable ones.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
Output JSON to stdout.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-watch
Continuous monitoring mode.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interval " " \fIseconds\fR
Probe interval in watch mode.
Default: 60.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-network
Include network probe (listeners, connections).
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-audit
Include auditd security events.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-baseline
Compare against learned baseline.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-learn
Learn current state as baseline.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config
Show current configuration.
.TP
.B \-\-init\-config
Create default configuration file.
.TP
.B \-\-audit\-learn
Learn audit baseline.
.TP
.B \-\-color
Force coloured output.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable coloured output.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
No issues detected.
.TP
.B 1
Warnings (minor issues).
.TP
.B 2
Critical (zombies, permission issues, unusual ports, security events).
.TP
.B 3
Error (probe failed).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable coloured output (standard).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.sentinel/config
User configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.sentinel/baseline.json
Learned baseline state.
.SH EXAMPLES
Quick analysis:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sentinel \-\-quick
.fi
.RE
.PP
Include network and audit probes:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sentinel \-\-quick \-\-network \-\-audit
.fi
.RE
.PP
Learn baseline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sentinel \-\-learn \-\-network
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compare against baseline:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sentinel \-\-baseline \-\-network
.fi
.RE
.PP
Save JSON fingerprint:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sentinel \-\-json > fingerprint.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Continuous monitoring:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sentinel \-\-watch \-\-interval 300
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR auditd (8),
.BR auditctl (8),
.BR netstat (8),
.BR ss (8)
.SH AUTHORS
William Murray
.UR https://github.com/williamofai/c\-sentinel
.UE
